# EQ Guide

## Octives

Every frequency range has a different result. I'm going to put down the 10 octaves of the spectrum. And give you a general description of how that sound might be described. So we start with the Octave, go into the Frequency range, then the Center frequency(s) of the octave. Go into descriptors, then the Benefits of these frequencies, and the cautions of using too much of them.


Octave 1 - 20Hz-40Hz - Center 32Hz - (31.5, 31.25, 31)

Description: Chest, Sub-bass, Rumble, Thump

Benefits: all extremely low-frequency instruments (kick,bass, organ) that need a feel of power added.

Caution: causes rumble (cool for FX - post production)
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 2 - 40Hz-80Hz - Center 64Hz (63.5, 63)

Description: Bass, Full/Fat/Round Bass.

Benefits: all low-frequency instruments (kick, bass, etc.) that need more fulness.

Caution: only add to ONE instrument, otherwise you will lose the definition in the low end.
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 3 - 80Hz-160Hz - Center 125Hz

Description: Full, Fat, Body, Boomy

Benefits: Piano, Low Strings, Floor tom, Snare drum Low male vox (around 100)

Caution: cut on kick drum, bass guitar (boomy)
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 4 - 160Hz-320Hz - Center 250Hz
Description: muddy, muffled, ****

Benefits: all mid-range instruments (including vocals) that require some **** and natural feel to the sound

Caution: use on fewer instruments in the mix, in order to keep the definition.
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 5 - 320Hz-640Hz - Center 500Hz

Description: horn-like, boxy, honky, tubey, raspy

Benefits: when cut, it will make things sound more transparent. 

Attack (raspy) bass guitar.
Horns (lower brass)
- Megaphone/TV effect
- Honky-tonk piano 

Caution: kick/snare drums sound BOXY when there is too much 500Hz
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 6 - 640Hz-1.25kHz - Center 1kHz (actual center of the frequency spectrum. 1kHz is often used as the reference frequency when doing psycho-acoustic measurements)

Description: Aggressive, Attack, Distortion, Nasal

Benefits: Distorted guitar, snare, anything that 
needs more aggressive feel to it. (Screaming low vocals) 
- Telephone effect

Caution: higher pitch vocals - nasal sound
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 7 - 1.25kHz - 2.5kHz - Center 2kHz

Description: Crunchy, Gritty, Noisy, Grainy

Benefits - Background instruments, including BG Vox. (synths, strings, etc.)

Caution: too much of 2kHz will reduce the smoothness of a sound.
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 8 - 2.5kHz - 5kHz - Center 4kHz (Human Speech Recognition)

Description: Sharp, Edgy, Presence, Definition, "ouch" 

Benefits: Lead VOCALS and soloing instruments. 

Caution: too much can cause listener's fatigue
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 9 - 5kHz - 10kHz - Center 8kHz

Description: Metallic, Brilliant, Sizzling, Sibilance 

Benefits: all instruments with metallic parts (cymbals, hats), shakers, snare bottom, etc., sax and trumpet

Caution: causes sibilance in vocals (extremely sharp S and T sounds). String noise.
__________________________________________________ __________

Octave 10 - 10kHz - 20kHz - Center 16kHz

Description: Bright, Airy, Open, Hissy

Benefits: all acoustic instruments, creates a feeling of openness and air.

Caution: tape (analog) hiss. Careful with samples that were taken from vinyl/tape

